---
layout: text
date: '2013-07-12T09:59:00+02:00'
tags:
- milling
- 3dprinting
- yachts
title: 3D Printing
slug: 3d-printing
---
3D printing has come up on my radar again and again over the past couple of years. It never left an impression deep enough to get me started though. I don't have a 3D printer, so that's the first barrier. The second is a lack of ideas of what kinds of objects I would like to print. That changed when I recently started thinking about yachts and 3D printing.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/P63KiL3N2qk?rel=0" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

In the video you can see the mold plug for the hull being milled out of a block of foam.

Before we dive in: what really is 3D printing? Essentially it refers to a bunch of methods to have a machine create a physical model from a digital one without the intervention of a human (or very little of it). The methods to get there can be divided into two categories:

## Printing

Building up an object by melting a source material and printing out the structure layer by layer. The materials available are quite limited (mostly plasticky) and the resulting structures are not very strong. The advantage of this method is that it can be quite cheap, as all you need is a printer for a couple hundred bucks and the raw material.

## Milling

Here you take a solid block of for example wood or metal and mill it down to the desired shape. The resulting object takes on the properties of the material it is made from, so you can create very durable/light/whatever-you-need structures. On the downside the machine you need will be more expensive and possibly the material, too. In addition you will need a whole block of the size the object you want to create, as opposed to just powder or a cable of plastic.

## Yachting

I can see various ways that these methods could help building, fitting out and maintaining a boat.

Maybe the most obvious is spare/custom parts. Be it a winch (handle), a custom attachment for the wind vane or a temporary fix for a broken boom. All these parts could probably be milled out of an aluminum block. Some would have to be assembled from multiple parts or would need additional, non-printable parts, but given the right circumstances it would still be easier than having a metal workshop build it for you by hand or to ship a part half around the planet to wherever you are stranded. Hack you could even build something on passage.

Another way to use 3D printing could be to make molds for creating laminated structures. How about a custom hard dodger or radar arch made out of carbon fiber? You could create your own 3D model or start off with one you download, print or mill the mold and then lay up the fibers. People in the racing world already mill molds for entire hulls, for example for the 2014 Volvo Ocean Race one designs, but maybe we should start a tad smaller.

You might start to wonder how the hell you are going to pull these kinds of projects off. I think two key factors are important.

The first is availability of machines and the expertise to use them and the processes around it (like creating a carbon fibre structure from a mold). Quite a few bigger cities already have so called fab labs where you can go and rent their machines. These places would also have people to help you operate them. The existing marine industry should be able to help with additional work such as laminating structures. In the long term maybe chandleries will offer 3D printing services so you can have all your needs served without leaving the marina.

The second challenge is to create the 3D models to be printed. The "normal" 3D printing world already has websites such as [thingiverse](http://www.thingiverse.com/) where people can up- and download models for free. Us sailors could start using these sites, but I can also imagine specialized sites for yachting popping up. While there are a lot of models available for free I think most yachties would be more than happy to pay a bunch of money for a winch they can print themselves for the cost of the material plus the time to assemble it instead of shelling out more than $1000 for a brand model. So people with the right skills could build businesses around selling these digital models. A new source of income for long term cruisers maybe?

Speaking of brands. I'm sure companies like Harkem have invested thousands of hours of research in the development of their hardware, so I wouldn't expect us to be able to create similarly sophisticated models from the start (I also don't know what the patent situation is.). Either way, starting small and building up the tools and knowledge over time, as a community, maybe similar to the open source software world, should eventually allow us to create hardware that is able to compete. Maybe not on a high-end race boat level but for most smaller parts of a cruising boat that we either find too expensive or not fitting our needs.

One point will be cost saving, the other will be to enable us to build just the parts we want and that are perfect for our boat instead of having to use the off-the-shelf stuff. Like Linux vs. Windows in the software world you will have to be more knowledgeable, and the end result won't have a shiny logo stamped onto it (unless you make your own), but you'll have created it yourself. When something breaks you will know how to repair it, and the next time you build it it will be better.
