---
:layout: text
:date: '2014-06-01T21:29:46+02:00'
:tags:
- sailing
- gopro
- cameras
- watch-keeping
- electronics
:title: Watch crew 2.0
:slug: watch-crew-2-0
---
Again and again I've been reading about collisions between sailing vessels and others like fisher boats or freighters. Especially with solo sailors (and probably a lot of double handed crews, too) it's difficult if not impossible to constantly maintain a lookout. I've experiences it myself during my Atlantic crossing – it's a pitch black night, the air is freezing, the boat is rolling 90 degrees and all you want is your watch to come to an end so you can roll up in your warm berth. Looking out into the dark is not only boring it's also pointless 99.9% of the time when there are no other boats around. This is especially true for solo sailors who are unable to get enough sleep because of watch-keeping.

So, I've been thinking™ – with all these new compact, water proof cameras, namely GoPros, available now, shouldn't it be possible to delegate some of that work to technology? A GoPro has a viewing angle of about 180 degrees, so you would need at least 2 of them, 3 are probably better. There's [a project on Kickstarter right now for a 360º camera](https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/giroptic/the-worlds-first-full-hd-360-camera) which would reduce the number of cameras to one. Mounted around the boat these cameras could potentialy be looking at the sea for you.

<iframe width="640" height="480" src="https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/giroptic/the-worlds-first-full-hd-360-camera/widget/video.html" frameborder="0" scrolling="no"> </iframe>

Both the GoPros and the 360 camera can stream video over wifi, so you could have some small computer at the nav station receiving the footage to either let you look at it from your cozy nav seat or deal with it itself while you are sleeping or fixing the toilet. You would have to run a power cable to the cameras though, as their batteries typically only last 1-2h.

The next step would be some image recognition software that removes your own boat from the video feed and then looks for obstacles such as other boats - with the sea being mostly blue and not very contrasty this shouldn't actually be that hard. A boat approaching should give the software some crisp edges to look at, and at night it would be even easier as all it has to look for are red/green/white dots – navigation lights.

Since I don't have a boat (yet) and my time at sea is limited I'm unable to run any tests if this could work, but as soon as I do I want to try this out. Obviously a well-rested/-fed/-motivated sailor is the best watch keeper, but for those times one of those is not at hand, an electronic solution might be a good replacement.
